[Edit]: Python `hash()` (#7197)
Codecademy/docs: content/python/concepts/built-in-functions/terms/hash/hash.md

---
Title: 'hash()'
Description: 'Returns the hash value of an object for efficient dictionary key comparisons and data retrieval operations.'
Subjects:
  - 'Computer Science'
  - 'Data Science'
Tags:
  - 'Data Structures'
  - 'Functions'
  - 'Hashes'
  - 'Methods'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-python-3'
  - 'paths/computer-science'
---

> The **`hash()`** function is a built-in Python function that returns the hash value of an object if it has one. Hash values are integers that are used to quickly compare dictionary keys during lookups, making data retrieval operations more efficient. The `hash()` function facilitates efficient dictionary key comparisons and is essential for implementing hashable collections like sets and dictionary keys.
> 
> The `hash()` function works with hashable objects such as numbers, [strings](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/python/strings), [tuples](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/python/tuples), and custom objects that implement the `__hash__()` method. It plays a crucial role in Python's internal data structures and is commonly used for data integrity checks, caching mechanisms, and creating unique identifiers for objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **`hash()`** function is a [built-in](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/python/built-in-functions) Python function that returns an object's hash value if it has one. Hash values are integers used to quickly compare dictionary keys during lookups, making data retrieval operations more efficient. The `hash()` function facilitates efficient [dictionary](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/python/dictionaries) key comparisons and is essential for implementing hashable collections like sets and dictionary keys.

The `hash()` function works with hashable objects such as numbers, [strings](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/python/strings), [tuples](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/python/tuples), and custom objects that implement the `__hash__()` method. It plays a crucial role in Python's internal data structures and is commonly used for data integrity checks, caching mechanisms, and creating unique identifiers for objects.
```

## Syntax

```pseudo
hash(object)
```

**Parameters:**

- `object`: The object for which to calculate the hash value. The object must be hashable (immutable types like numbers, strings, tuples, or custom objects implementing `__hash__()`).

**Return value:**

The `hash()` function returns an integer representing the hash value of the object. If the object is not hashable, it raises a `TypeError`.

## Example 1: Basic Hash Calculation

This example demonstrates how to calculate hash values for different data types including integers, strings, and floats:

```py
# Hash different data types
number = 42
text = "Python Programming"
decimal = 3.14159

# Calculate hash values
number_hash = hash(number)
text_hash = hash(text)
decimal_hash = hash(decimal)

# Display the results
print(f"Hash of {number}: {number_hash}")
print(f"Hash of '{text}': {text_hash}")
print(f"Hash of {decimal}: {decimal_hash}")
```

The output of the above code is:

```shell
Hash of 42: 42
Hash of 'Python Programming': -1234567890123456789
Hash of 3.14159: 1234567890987654321
```

> **Note:** These are placeholder values. Hash values for strings and floats can vary between runs due to hash randomization.

> This example shows that `hash()` works with various immutable data types. Notice that integers often return themselves as hash values for small numbers, while strings and floats produce larger hash values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above example shows that `hash()` works with various immutable data types. Notice that integers often return themselves as hash values for small numbers, while strings and floats produce larger hash values.
```

## Example 2: Hashable vs Non-Hashable Objects

This example illustrates the difference between hashable and non-hashable objects, demonstrating why some objects can be hashed while others cannot:

```py
# Hashable objects (immutable)
hashable_tuple = (1, 2, 3, "hello")
hashable_string = "Python"
hashable_number = 100

# Calculate hash for hashable objects
print(f"Tuple hash: {hash(hashable_tuple)}")
print(f"String hash: {hash(hashable_string)}")
print(f"Number hash: {hash(hashable_number)}")

# Non-hashable objects (mutable)
mutable_list = [1, 2, 3]
mutable_dict = {"key": "value"}

# Attempting to hash mutable objects will raise TypeError
try:
  print(f"List hash: {hash(mutable_list)}")
except TypeError as e:
  print(f"Error hashing list: {e}")

try:
  print(f"Dict hash: {hash(mutable_dict)}")
except TypeError as e:
  print(f"Error hashing dictionary: {e}")
```

> The output of this code is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output of the above code is as follows:
```
